[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In today's
video, we want to look at roots of unity,
which are ostensibly complex numbers that
are equally spaced around the unit circle
and obey a seemingly remarkable
algebraic property. These roots
of unity are mainstays in field theory
and are related to cyclotomic fields,
which play an important role in abstract
algebra. This topic serves as a good
example of a very explicit situation where we
can see that we need to separate two concepts
that are currently fused together. We must
approach this in a more organized way.
The context is the unit circle viewed inside
the complex numbers. Here’s the number 1,
and here is the number i. The unit circle
is given by the equation x² + y² = 1 or,
in complex analysis terms, the
points z, or complex numbers z,
whose quadrance Q(z) = 1. I remind you that the
quadrance of a complex number a + bi is defined
as a² + b². The absolute value of a complex
number doesn’t really play any role in algebra.
Now, if we want to approach the unit circle
from an algebraic point of view, we probably
know what to do. What we need is a rational
parameterization, which is a way of describing
points on the circle purely algebraically.
Here it is in terms of complex numbers:
𝑒
(
𝑡
)
=
−
𝑡
+
×
𝑖
e(t)=
1+t
1−t
​
+
1+t
2t
​
×i. We are rewriting
something that I hope is quite familiar to you
because I’ve talked about it quite a lot—the
importance of being able to describe points
on the unit circle algebraically, with this
as the x-coordinate and this as the y-coordinate.
So, we’re rewriting that now in terms of a complex
number. This is an algebraic approach, and it’s
far superior to the cosine(theta)-sine(theta)
picture for most applications—not all, but for
most, especially geometrical and algebraic ones.
From the fundamental relation that Q(z
* w) = Q(z) * Q(w), which is a basic
aspect of quadrance for complex numbers,
we can deduce that the product of two unit
complex numbers is going to be another unit
complex number. So, if we have two points
on the unit circle and we think of them as
complex numbers and we take their product,
z * w, then the new number that we get also has a
quadrance of 1, so it will also lie on the circle.
This brings us to a very natural and
interesting question: if our first
number is
𝑒
(
𝑡
)
e(t) (that's the parameter)
and the second number is
𝑒
(
𝑟
)
e(r), then,
first of all, geometrically, where should the
product be? And another kind of question is,
how do we describe this position algebraically
as well as geometrically? Where is
𝑒
(
𝑡
)
×
𝑒
(
𝑟
)
e(t)×e(r), both geometrically and algebraically?
The beauty of working algebraically is that
we can be precise and specific. We don’t have
to deal at the level of abstractions; we
can get right down to concrete examples.
So let’s do that here. Let’s have a look at two
particular complex numbers on the unit circle.
Let’s say
𝑒
(
/
)
e(1/3). You can
calculate that
𝑒
(
/
)
e(1/3) is
/
+
×
𝑖
4/5+3/5×i, which we’ll call z. Geometrically, that
means if we go up here in the y-direction to the
point with the coefficient 1/3 (what we’re calling
𝑖
/
i/3) and
we join these two points here, then where
that line meets the unit circle is the point
/
+
×
𝑖
4/5+3/5×i. The other
one we’ll take is
𝑒
(
/
)
e(2/3).
So we take this point
/
×
𝑖
2/3×i on the y-axis, draw the line, and see where
it intersects the unit circle. We get the point
/
+
×
𝑖
5/13+12/13×i, which we’ll call w.
Alright, so we have z and w, and we
can take these two complex numbers
and multiply them algebraically because
we know how to multiply complex numbers.
I’ll leave it to you to check that what
you get, the product of these two things,
is
−
/
+
×
𝑖
−16/65+63/65×i. And you can
further check that it’s actually
𝑒
(
/
)
e(9/7). That means if we take the point
/
×
𝑖
9/7×i up here and
draw a line from here to that point, it will
meet the circle at exactly the point z * w.
A natural question is, how do we get 9/7 from 1/3
and 2/3 if we wanted to do it directly? The answer
lies in this beautiful formula right here:
/
9/7 happens to be the sum of these
two parameter values divided by
−
1− the product of those two parameter values.
So if this was r and s, then the formula
here would be
𝑟
+
𝑠
r+s on top, divided by
−
𝑟
×
𝑠
1−r×s. I’ll leave this as an exercise
for you to verify. You might want to
look at some previous videos
in this series for some hints.
Geometrically, it turns out that
z * w, the line joining z and w,
is parallel to the line from 1 to z * w.
This is a remarkable additional feature
of this situation. So, if we took, say, this
line right here (the line joining z and w),
and then we also took the line joining 1 and
z * w, those two lines are parallel. That’s
a purely geometrical way of describing
the product of points on the unit circle.
Now, if you’re interested in this, I talked
about it in my algebraic topology series quite
some time ago—so I think it’s in Algebraic
Topology, maybe number 3 or something like
that. You can have a look. I talked about
how this is a special case of a much more
general phenomenon that works for more general
conics. It’s quite interesting. So, this is a
purely geometrical way, and here’s the algebraic
solution: we know what the parameters for two
complex numbers are, and here’s the parameter
for their product. And purely geometrically,
if we know two points on the unit circle, we
can draw the line between them and then draw the
line that’s through the point 1, parallel to that
given line, and we get the product. So, two ways
of describing the product of points on the unit
circle in the complex plane—purely algebraically
and purely geometrically—and it’s a great exercise
for you to state these precisely and prove them.
You might be surprised to find out that your
typical undergraduate does not know the contents
of what I just said on that previous slide. That’s
quite surprising to most of them. They think,
“Wow, why hasn’t somebody told us this before?”
They’ve all been told a different story,
and it’s true around the world—doesn’t matter
where you go, they’re all told an alternate story,
which is actually much weaker. And at UNSW, we
do this as well, unfortunately. But of course,
as the 21st century rolls on, things
are going to be changing. But currently,
we do the following old-fashioned thing: we
say that it all has to do with angles. When
you’re multiplying complex numbers on the unit
circle, it’s a question about adding angles.
This is what students actually learn. It’s
very unfortunate. They learn that if you
take the angle formed by the x-axis and z,
and the angle formed by the x-axis and w,
those are called the argument of z and
the argument of w (those angles). Then
the product z * w has an argument or
an angle that is the sum of those two
angles. So, the argument of z * w equals
the argument of z plus the argument of w.
And that’s how you describe the multiplication
of complex numbers geometrically, using angles.
This is applied mathematics, not really pure
mathematics. The reason is that the angles are,
in fact, impossible to define properly and to
compute approximately. We can define them and
deal with them, but defining them precisely and
computing them precisely requires an infinite
amount of work. So, we cross this border—this
Rubicon—between the world in which we live,
where you can actually make calculations, and this
imaginary, fictitious world where you’re allowed
to do an infinite number of things and obtain
outputs. And it’s this land across this imaginary
river out there that we’re constantly appealing
to in modern mathematics, but which is actually
illusory—it’s a dream. But that’s ultimately the
dream that’s responsible for this idea of angles.
Because angles are so difficult
to get your hands on precisely,
what happens in undergraduate mathematics
around the world is that we all have this
tacit agreement that we’re going to stick to two
baby triangles: the 1-1-√2 triangle and the 1-2-√3
triangle—the triangle with angles 45 degrees, 45
degrees, and 60 degrees, and 30 degrees. Those are
basically the only two triangles that we’re going
to use. So by positioning them in different ways,
we can create a bunch of different questions
for undergraduates. And invariably—it’s
remarkable—around the world, whenever students
are asked about specific questions involving
complex number calculations and involving
angles, invariably 60 degrees, 45 degrees,
or 30 degrees figure—or some rotation
of them in some of the other quadrants.
It’s actually a very limiting situation. Let’s
look at an example that’s a little bit outside
that familiar trodden territory. Let’s have a
look at the same numbers that we were looking at:
say,
𝑤
=
+
×
𝑖
w=
​
+
×i. And ask ourselves, okay, that’s a very
concrete number on the unit circle associated
with the lovely Pythagorean triple 5-12-13, right?
It’s really just a rescaling of that Pythagorean
triple. Let’s ask, what is the angle associated
with that? What is the theta, the argument of
/
+
×
𝑖
5/13+12/13×i?
Well, that’s a standard computation that most
undergraduates know how to do at some level.
They know that you have to do a certain number
of things. So, the first thing that probably an
undergraduate would think is, “Well, we need an
arctan function here.” So, the usual formula is
that theta equals tan inverse of y/x. So you
take your y-coordinate and your x-coordinate,
which in this case are 12/13 and 5/13, and you
take the ratio and you take tan inverse of 12/5.
But what is tan inverse, or arctan? It’s the same
thing. Well, that’s given by an infinite formula,
which most undergraduates, after
they’ve done a course in calculus,
should hopefully know. So, it’s z - z³/3 + z⁵/5
- z⁷/7, and so on. The pattern is pretty clear:
there are just odd numbers
in the denominators there,
and the powers in z are going up by
2 through all the odd possibilities.
Okay, so that’s some kind of infinite expression.
That means that if we want to calculate tan
inverse of 12/5, we should just replace z
with 12/5 to get 12/5 - 1/3 of (12/5)³ + 1/5
of (12/5)⁵ - 1/7 of (12/5)⁷, and so on. But if
the undergraduate stares at this for a second,
they will realize, “Wait a minute, something’s
not quite right,” because 12/5 is bigger than 2,
and so these powers—these are powers of 2—they’re
getting big. We are dividing by something that’s
not getting as big as fast, so this thing is going
to blow up. It’s not going to converge and get
smaller and smaller as we would like. And
in fact, if the undergraduate thinks back,
they’ll think, “Okay, actually, this formula
comes with a certain requirement that really
only works when z has a modulus less than
1, or quadrance less than 1—same thing.”
So that means that we actually need to try
something else. We need to twist this a little
bit to get at this angle theta. So, how do we
find theta? Well, a clever student might look
at it this way. They might say, “Okay, this
theta here was a bit problematic because the
y was bigger than the x, but if we take this
sort of angle here, which is π/2 - theta,
then that’s a little bit different because
then the x and the y are interchanged.” So,
if we look at π/2 - theta, that’s going to be
tan inverse of now x/y. And the x/y is 5/12.
Now we’re in a happier position with respect to
this infinite series defining tan inverse of x/y.
So we now could take 5/12 - 1/3 of (5/12)³ +
1/5 of (5/12)⁵ - 1/7 of (5/12)⁷, and so on.
Now, I want you to consider this right here. I
know the average undergraduate learns that you’re
not supposed to flinch when you see something
like this, okay? But logically speaking,
there is something seriously problematic
around here, because we’re being asked to
do an infinite number of arithmetic operations
here, and this is not even defined. We have not
defined what we mean by doing an infinite
number of arithmetic operations, okay? So,
it’s not a question of whether the thing exists
or not; it’s just that the actual definition of
arithmetic that we have always involves adding
a finite number of things. We have not defined
what it means to add an infinite number of things.
That’s why you have to speak of all the problems:
what happens to these numbers actually? What
happens when we get to the z power? Okay,
we’re taking (5/12)^z. Well, what does that
mean? That’s way beyond the universe in terms
of writing it down in any reasonable fashion.
And in what sense does it make any sense to add
that particular term to what we’ve already
got? It’s clear that this is blowing out on
us computationally long before we get to
infinity. Long before we get to infinity,
this has just exploded in our faces, and we
just have egg all over us. It’s only because we
actually do not make the computations that we’re
allowed to not address the nonsense of it, okay?
In fact, that’s what happens. Our machines, of
course, know enough not to try to add up all of
these infinite number of things. The machine knows
that, well, we’re just going to truncate at some
point and then give the human whatever we have.
So that’s what your machine will do if you ask it,
well, to evaluate tan inverse of 5/12. It will
give you something like this: 0.39479119699976,
and at that point, it will stop. It will not
actually exhibit three dots, usually. Okay,
so the undergraduate takes this, which is the
answer to this infinite computation. In fact,
it’s not, okay, but let’s pretend it
is. And then we solve for theta. So,
theta is going to be π/2 - tan inverse of 5/12.
So now we have to procure π/2. Well, π is known
to about five or ten trillion places these days;
that’s the extent of it. But ostensibly,
we’re taking this π, dividing it by 2,
and taking this infinite decimal that we’ve
already computed and taking the difference.
So there’s another infinite amount of
work that we’re ostensibly doing. Okay,
you can see this is all just pretending, right?
We’re just pretending here. This is how we do
modern mathematics when we come to examples.
We are thinking about these infinite things;
that’s theoretically what we’re doing. But
practically, we’re actually doing something
quite different. We’re just always working at the
level of floating-point and truncating things and
pretending that the floating-point truncations are
true reflections of these infinite fantasies that
we like to dream about. That’s what it is, ladies
and gentlemen—that’s what’s actually happening.
So the undergraduate comes up with something
like this: so the answer is the angle is
1.176005207095, and so on. So you can see why
my claim that this is actually the wrong way of
thinking about things, right? The previous
way of thinking about things, in terms of
describing points on the unit circle, involved the
rational parameterization. No infinite processes
were required, okay? Very concrete. The seeming
advantage of being able to add angles is far
overcompensated by the difficulty in procuring
the angles in the first place. It’s a false
economy to think that we’ve saved ourselves
some time or effort because we only need to
add the angles. In fact, if we actually did
that correctly, there’d be an infinite amount
of work. And adding angles is also completely
beyond us, really. So, it’s very important
to realize that the angle story is an analytic
story, which is just an approximation to things,
and logically speaking, it’s not in algebra and
doesn’t really make sense, except in an applied,
truncated kind of fashion. That’s
the reality of where things are.
Alright, let’s now turn to this roots of unity
question, which deals with a very simple,
seemingly simple, kind of equation—something
like z⁷ = 1. This is a particular example
of roots of unity, where the n is 7, so we
end up getting the seventh roots of unity,
supposedly. Almost all modern mathematicians
these days believe that this equation has seven
solutions in the complex plane and that they’re
equally spaced around the unit circle—a seventh
of a turn between any two of them. The usual
names or symbols for these so-called roots of
unity are the following: this one, which
is the obvious solution, and then there’s
𝑒
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
i2π/7
, the 2π/7 referring to the fact that we’re
taking the full turn all the way around,
which is an angle of 2π,
and dividing by 7. And then
𝑒
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
i4π/7
,
𝑒
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
i6π/7
, and then these other ones here
are the negatives of these:
𝑒
−
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
−i2π/7
,
𝑒
−
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
−i4π/7
,
𝑒
−
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
−i6π/7
.
So your typical modern mathematician is absolutely
convinced—no question whatsoever about it—that
there are exactly seven complex numbers, and here
they are, that are exactly on the unit circle,
equally separated, that are the solutions
to this simple equation, z⁷ = 1. However,
if you actually try to draw a heptagon, then maybe
some doubt starts to creep into your mind. And if
you appreciate that the ancients, like the Greeks,
were quite flabbergasted by this problem—how
do you actually construct a beautiful, regular
heptagon? If you do it by hand like I’ve done,
you can probably even see just by looking at it
that this is probably not exactly a heptagon.
It’s actually quite surprisingly hard to draw a
heptagon accurately. In fact, it’s impossible to
draw it completely accurately, even in principle.
There’s no technology known to mankind that will
in principle draw a perfect heptagon, a regular
heptagon. This is an interesting thing, okay? And
we can see this by thinking about how a computer
would draw it. I mean, if you ask your computer,
your computer will draw a very nice-looking
one, but it’s not actually exactly accurate.
So your computer actually has to calculate where
these points are. It has to convert the sort of
symbolic
𝑒
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
i2π/7
to something
that’s concrete in terms of x-coordinate and
y-coordinate. And how does it do that? So
𝑒
𝑖
𝜋
/
e
i2π/7
is a kind of short form for cos(2π/7) + i
sin(2π/7). Okay, so we haven’t talked very
much about these transcendental functions, and
they’re really fraught with difficulties—all of
this should actually be in quotes, okay? But just
to give you an overview, the idea is that what you
have to do in order to find out what this complex
number really is, is you have to evaluate these
two things. So, cos(2π/7)—well, that’s again
the same kind of difficult story as the tan
inverse of 5/12. There’s a certain series, a
certain infinite series, that was well-known,
goes back a long time, probably even to Hindu
mathematicians, and it’s 1 - 1/2! (2π/7)² + 1/4!
(2π/7)⁴ - 1/6! (2π/7)⁶, and so on. So here we
have factorials now, so 4! (for example) means
1 * 2 * 3 * 4. So what’s involved here is again
an infinite number of arithmetic operations with
increasingly more and more complicated things,
and it’s quite clear that you can’t ever really
do this. In fact, even the definition of this
infinite sum is actually problematic. And then
there’s a corresponding thing for sin(2π/7) or
a similar kind of series for the imaginary part.
But our computers don’t fuss around about
this because our computers just truncate
at some convenient point and spew out some
decimals, which we take. We take the decimals
that our computer gives, and then we add three
dots, okay? And these three dots represent,
in our minds, all of that extra infinite amount
of work that we could do, or perhaps should do,
but we’re not going to do it. And we can
kind of console ourselves that an engineer
is not concerned about these three dots. So
the engineer comes along and says, “Okay,
that’s eight decimal places. That’s far more than
I need to be able to put this on the page very,
very cleanly and clearly. That’s all the
precision I need. I don’t care anything about
these three dots here.” But the reality is that
an exact understanding of this z is beyond us,
okay? The point is that we cannot actually get
a hold of this thing. In fact, this thing does
not even exist, properly speaking. The right
orientation is that there is no such thing,
okay? We’re talking about something
that doesn’t exist as if it did exist.
And similarly, the fundamental theorem, which
tells us that z⁷ - 1 ought to be the product
of all these linear factors corresponding
to all these different seventh roots of
unity (by the way, which can be expressed
as this is z, and this would be z², z³, z⁴,
z⁵, z⁶), so there’s a pleasant kind
of algebraic way of writing them down
like this—this fundamental theorem also doesn’t
really work. So if you plug something like this
in here and you try to equate the right-hand
side to the left-hand side, you will see that
it doesn’t work, okay? So it’s a bit of a
dream. It’s an approximation to something,
okay? But it’s actually algebraically not hanging
together. So, the existence of roots of unity is
really something that we need to rethink, and
that has a lot of implications for algebra.
What makes this topic a little bit difficult to
get your head around is that there are, in fact,
algebraic ways of solving something like z⁷ =
1. It’s not that this equation is beyond us,
and I’m going to be showing you ways of very
clearly setting up a framework in which we have
seven solutions of that. So there’s a bona fide
algebraic way of dealing with this equation. But
the point is that it’s separate, okay? This
algebraic approach to, say, solving something
like z⁷ = 1 should be kept separate from the
analytic approach or an analytic approximate
approach of solving z⁷ = 1 involving seven numbers
on the unit circle, which are equally spaced.
So, currently, in many algebraic minds—probably
not all, but in many of them—these two things
are so intimately connected, and they’re just
part of the same story. What I want you to start
thinking about is that we have to separate these
things. We’re going to have to push them apart;
we have to make some space. Over here is
the algebraic approach, purely finite,
purely algebraic, completely solid.
Over here is the analytic approach,
where we’re working within the complex numbers,
but almost everything is approximate. We have
some nice geometry, but the geometry is only
approximate. And these two pictures are really
different kinds of pictures. There is some
kind of connection between them, and it’s
interesting to explore what the connection
is, but they’re logically separate, okay?
So, we are going to be trying to turn our
gaze away from this complex number picture
that rests on the fundamental theorem of algebra
towards this more algebraic approach to solving
polynomial equations. In our next video, we
are actually going to start with some abstract
algebra. We’re going to look at probably the
simplest kinds of things that we can do, which
are not groups and not fields—they are something
in the direction of linear spaces. So, we’re going
to concentrate on linear spaces to begin with.
That’s a great starting point for building up
abstract algebra. I hope you’ll join me for that.
I’m Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music